The locals call this Boden’s Pool,
after the Germanic pagan god
who was credited with creating earth,
sky, man, and woman.
The water is the source of the River Lippe,
which flows
from the spa town of Bad Lippspringe
into the Rhine
and the industrial areas of the Ruhr Valley.
Today,
it’s a peaceful and prosperous little town,
just as it was 60 years ago
when Franz and Hilda Kusserow
arrived here with their 11 children.
What began as a peaceful idyll
became an epic battle between good and evil,
as the Kusserows
defied Hitler and the Nazi regime.
Franz and Hilda Kusserow
were married in 1911,
three years before the Great War
that traumatized Europe.
Franz Kusserow fought for his country,
but his life and beliefs were transformed.
The Kusserows’ story
has been lovingly chronicled
by the eldest of the 11 children,
Annemarie, now age 78.
Annemarie’s parents were born
into a comfortably-off Protestant environment,
but the First World War
and the chance meeting
with a Jehovah’s Witness
dramatically changed their lives.
Franz, a post-office clerk,
and Hilda, a former schoolteacher,
became full-time missionaries
for the International Bible Students Association.
They came to this house
on the outskirts of Bad Lippspringe
to set up congregations in North Westphalia.
No Kusserows live here today,
but when members of the family do return,
there are vivid memories.
Magdalena is the Kusserow’s fourth daughter.
What are your early memories of this house?
Well, it was so nice.
We played here in the garden,
in this little place, and then there also.
We had some trees
with apples and some fruit.
We had some potatoes,
salad, and different things.
We played.
We danced together.
And then we took some flowers
and made a ring on the head.
Then we went down with the geese to the river
—to the river to bring the geese.
They have to—
They could . . .
Swim?
Swim also, yes.
And we swam also.
You took the geese for a swim?
Yes.
And on the way,
they took the grass, and they ate.
And we had much fun.
It’s a long time since I was here
—not since 1939, I think.
The door seemed bigger then.
Hans-Werner, now 63,
was the Kusserows’ tenth child.
It was a very happy time,
especially as I had so many brothers and sisters.
Everything was happy until I went to school.
That was bad, of course.
Every day when children went to school,
they thought in advance:
‘What will happen today?
What will happen today?’
I remember many things.
I remember how strong we were,
how we didn’t salute the flag,
how we wouldn’t say “Heil Hitler,”
and how we acted a bit differently
from other pupils.
Some days were hard.
The teacher was like a devil.
She took my hand, and she said:
“Heil Hitler! Heil Hitler!”
and beat me.
Would you say you were frightened
when they would hit you?
Did you never say “Heil Hitler”?
No, no, we never said it
because my father said:
“Look, ‘Heil Hitler’ means
“that the salvation comes from Hitler.
“As we learned from the Bible,
the heil—the salvation—
comes by Jesus Christ.”
The Kusserows’ house
was known as “The Golden Age.”
A huge sign advertising
the Jehovah’s Witness magazine
was emblazoned in gold letters
outside their home.
Inside, the parents gave the children
their love and their time,
and they taught the Bible and music
—lessons which would have
a lifetime’s impact.
The Kusserows, then and now,
firmly believed
the creed of the Jehovah’s Witnesses
—that our world, now influenced by Satan,
will soon be transformed
into the Thousand Year Reign of Christ
promised in the Bible.
The evil will die,
while the good and faithful
will be physically reborn into Paradise.
I was from morning to evening
visiting people who liked to know
what the Bible says
about the preaching work, or missionary work.
They liked to receive me.
Much of the literature distributed
by the Kusserows
came from the Witnesses’ headquarters
in New York.
In Germany, the Witnesses were
a very small sect of just 20,000 people,
and yet Hitler saw the movement
as a rival ideology to the Nazis.
So he set out to seize their literature
and wreck the organization.
So where were the books and the literature?
Where were they hidden?
Here also.
Here also and there.
Under the stairs?
Yes, from there and also . . .
Up here.
And how many times
did the police come to the house?
Oh, many, many times.
And they hid them here?
Here? Yes.
Here.
So under the eaves?
Yeah, in the roof.
And then the books here—ten meters.
They came how many times did you say?
Eighteen times—16, 17, 18.
And they always searched in this area?
And did not find the books.
The Nazis weren’t easily dissuaded.
“The Golden Age” sign on the Kusserows’ house
was blacked out.
But although the Witnesses
had been officially banned,
the family maintained
their religious activities in secret.
She said: “Magdalena, you go behind
“—three, four meters behind me.
You carry the Bible,
and I’ll have nothing in my hands.”
And she spoke with the people.
And there was one man;
I don’t know who he was.
He was a stranger.
He didn’t belong to Bad Lippspringe,
and he denounced us.
He called the police.
In 1936 was the first time
my mother was arrested in Paderborn.
This was the first time.
Franz and Hilda Kusserow were
among the hundreds of Jehovah’s Witnesses
arrested by the Gestapo in 1936.
They were briefly reunited in 1937
when this last complete family photograph
was taken.
Later that year,
their son Siegfried died
in a swimming accident.
His death signaled the end of the idyll.
By now, most Germans
were wallowing in nationalistic pride
and revived economic fortune.
Communists, gypsies,
homosexuals, dissidents, the handicapped
and, above all, the Jews
were hunted down even in Bad Lippspringe.
Today, the town memorializes
its former Jewish residents.
Little more than 50 years ago,
they were hounding them out
and baying for their blood.
It seems a long while ago.
For the moment, dissidents are tolerated.
Jehovah’s Witnesses can sell their magazine,
The Watchtower,
and openly recruit converts.
In the 1930’s,
this street in Paderborn
was dominated by the prison.
And this is where the Kusserows were jailed.
Witnesses began to lose
their jobs and pensions.
The Gestapo stepped up their surveillance.
But the Kusserows’ garden
was still supplying fresh produce.
The three youngest members of the family
were being well cared for.
They were the next target.
At that time,
I was ill and didn’t go to school.
I was lying in bed here.
Suddenly, a car drove up.
There seemed to be two civilians in it.
I could see them from the window.
They burst in and wanted me to go with them.
They hesitated because I was ill,
so for appearances’ sake,
they took me to a doctor
to see if I could be taken away.
Then they collected my sister and brother
from school,
and we left.
We were taken from school.
My brother who was ill
was collected from home.
We were taken by two policemen
to the orphanage in Dorsten.
I can still remember how I vomited
all over the jacket of one of the policemen.
It took a lot of effort to clean it up
once the car stopped.
Then the journey continued
to Dorsten and the orphanage.
In the morning,
he again told us to give the Hitler salute.
And when we refused,
he took us into a room,
laid us across the table,
and beat us black and blue.
It was bad.
We took a shower every evening,
and when the female head of the house saw us,
she made us bathe separately
so that the other children would not see.
It was very bad.
When the Second World War began,
the two oldest Kusserow daughters,
Annemarie and Waltraud,
escaped surveillance
and left to find jobs in Berlin.
It was more difficult for their brothers.
In December 1939, Wilhelm,
after refusing military service,
was thrown into jail.
“Dear Parents, Brothers, and Sisters:
“All of you know how much you mean to me,
“and I am repeatedly reminded of this
every time I look at our family photograph.
“How harmonious things always were at home!
“Nonetheless, above all else,
“we must love God
—as our Führer, Jesus Christ, commanded.
If we stand up for Him, he will reward us.”
As predominantly Aryan Germans,
Jehovah’s Witnesses were sometimes allowed
the privilege of a Nazi trial.
Later, Wilhelm’s court-appointed lawyer,
Dr. James Roher, wrote to the family:
“I had long conversations with your son
before his trial
“and admired his calm confidence of faith.
“He never wavered,
“although he was severely pressed
from all quarters.
“He calmly accepted the announcement
of the hour of his execution,
“refusing again to change his mind,
“that is,
to abandon his faith and save his life.
“On the morning of the execution,
I took his hand and said in consolation:
“‘Mr. Kusserow,
you have been wonderfully strong.
“Remain strong now.’
“He squeezed my hand and smilingly replied:
“‘No, Doctor, don’t be troubled.
“‘I am gaining everlasting life.
“All this is only a change.’
“He asked me to send you his greetings.
He stood upright when facing death
and was dead at once.”
Unable to browbeat the Witnesses,
the Nazis tried lies and subterfuge.
With an elaborate ritual of deceit,
they issued certificates and reports
declaring that Wilhelm Kusserow
had died a hero’s death,
fighting for Hitler and the Third Reich.
For some unknown reason,
the Nazis allowed the family
to collect Wilhelm’s body
from Münster Prison,
where he’d been shot.
His sister Waltraud helped
to arrange the funeral.
It shocked me deep,
but Wilhelm was true until his death.
I have seen the body
in the little hall there,
and he was in a pilot suit.
And here, like, here . . .
The bullet holes?
Yeah, holes and some blood was in the mouth.
There was a big funeral
with the secret police around
and with persons in uniform
—policemen.
And my brother Karl
said some words.
And later, my brother Karl
because he spoke a few words and the prayer,
the Gestapo kept him.
Karl, son number three,
was the next arrested.
He was brutally tortured in Dachau
and Sachsenhausen concentration camps.
In April 1941, the Gestapo swooped again.
After a brief release from jail,
Franz and Hilda Kusserow were rearrested,
as were their daughters
Hildegard and Magdalena.
Nazi tenants took over the house
that once proclaimed
the dawning of a golden age.
The Kusserows
were sent to concentration camps,
where the Witnesses
were forced to wear distinctive insignia.
The Jews wore a yellow star;
the Witnesses, a purple triangle.
When we went through the concentration camp,
we saw this purple triangle.
Then I knew that there’s my sister.
I said:
“Hello, Sister. How are you?
What’s your name?
Where do you come from?”
The Witnesses fared better in the camps
than many prisoners.
Absolute conviction in their faith
and strict discipline
helped their morale.
Soon Magdalena was joined at Ravensbrück
by her mother and her sister Hildegard.
I saw my mother.
I was so happy, and she told me everything.
She was happy.
And it was really good
because I had swollen arms.
I couldn’t walk.
I couldn’t dress myself
because of this sickness or something.
And my mother dressed me;
she fixed my hair.
Despite the evil and hardship at Ravensbrück,
Frau Kusserow kept her faith.
Her son Wilhelm
had given his life for the faith,
and his younger brother Wolfgang,
when called for military service,
showed true Kusserow defiance.
I was brought up
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
according to God’s word
contained in the Holy Scriptures.
The greatest and most holy law
he gave mankind is:
“You shall love your God above all else
and your neighbor as yourself.”
Other commandments read:
“You must not kill.”
Did our Creator
have all this written down for the trees?
Just as Jesus Christ and his disciples
were persecuted,
so are God’s people also persecuted today.
I know for sure that if Jesus Christ
were to live on earth today,
he would be persecuted just as he was then.
Wolfgang was beheaded on March 28, 1942.
The night before, he wrote:
“My Dear Parents
and My Dear Brothers and Sisters:
“I shall leave you
as your third son and brother
“early in the morning.
“Be not sad.
“The time will come
when we shall be together again.
“Those who sow with tears will reap with joy.
“At James 1:12, it says:
“‘Blessed is the man
that endureth temptation:
“for when he is tried,
he shall receive the crown of life,
“which [Jehovah] hath promised
to them that love him.’
“In this faith and in this conviction,
“I go from you.
Your son and brother, Wolfgang.”
By now, Waltraud had returned from Berlin
and managed to find work
in this florist shop in Paderborn.
She was ordered to greet customers
with the “Heil Hitler” salutation.
She refused.
After being given eight days
to change her mind,
she still refused and was arrested
and imprisoned in Paderborn
and told to make ammunition.
I cannot work for the war.
For this, I cannot work; this is for the war.
My brother was killed, was shot.
My other brother was beheaded.
My three sisters, little ones,
the Gestapo have kept.
And my other brother
is in a concentration camp;
my mother is in a concentration camp;
my two sisters and also my father
are in prison.
No, I cannot make them.
By 1944, just one member
of the Kusserow family was free,
Annemarie, who was still in Berlin.
Every week,
I had with me in my apartment
some persons
to have a Bible study.
And therefore, I was arrested.
There must have been a person
who had observed us.
The Nazis had rounded up
every single member of the family.
Some were dead
and the future for the rest uncertain.
Yet, they had a lifeline.
Unlike all other prisoners,
Jehovah’s Witnesses
could secure their release
simply by signing a declaration
that they’d abandon their faith.
Of the thousands arrested,
only a handful did so.
I was not ready to sign.
I thought:
‘Oh, I have to think of my parents,
‘my little children
‘—I mean my brothers and my sisters.
‘They are so faithful, so obedient,
‘although we were all separated.
‘We were all separated.
‘And when I am now free,
‘what should I do?
‘My conscience
—I have thought it over.
It is impossible to be unfaithful.’
How could I sign that I am not a Witness?
How could I leave my faith?
Never, never, never!
In April 1945,
Ravensbrück concentration camp was liberated.
Hilda Kusserow and her daughters
were released.
Imprisonment
had strengthened their faith,
and morally the Witnesses
had defeated the Nazis.
Hilda was reunited with her husband
and, with the surviving members
of their family, rebuilt their lives.
Although they never returned
to their “Golden Age” home,
they always remained
faithful Jehovah’s Witnesses.
They were back in a Germany
where the Protestant and Catholic churches
were still the predominant religious groups.
Despite rebellion and martyrdom
by some believers,
most church leaders
had bowed the knee to the Nazis.
Hitler, confirmed a Catholic,
was never excommunicated.
The church was silent
while millions of Jews and others died.
Among the organized Christian religions
in Germany,
it was only the Jehovah’s Witnesses
who refused any compromise at all
with Hitler and the Nazis.
Like the first Christians,
they too were reviled and ridiculed
and they were martyred.
Among the millions who perished
in the Holocaust,
there were some 5,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses,
and yet those who survived proclaimed
that there is a purpose to all this.
There is a God.